# Prometheus Pushgateway

The Prometheus Pushgateway exists to allow ephemeral and batch jobs to
expose their metrics to Prometheus. Since these kinds of jobs may not
exist long enough to be scraped, they can instead push their metrics
to a Pushgateway. The Pushgateway then exposes these metrics to
Prometheus.

The Pushgateway is explicitly not an aggregator, but rather a metrics
cache. It does not have a statsd-like semantics. The metrics pushed
are exactly the same as you would present for scraping in a
permanently running program.

For machine-level metrics, the
[textfile](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/blob/master/README.md#textfile-collector)
collector of the Node exporter is usually more appropriate. The Pushgateway is best
used for service-level metrics.

## Run it

Compile the binary using the provided Makefile (type `make`).

For the most basic setup, just start the binary. To change the address
to listen on, use the `-addr` flag. The `-persistence.file` flag
allows you to specify a file in which the pushed metrics will be
persisted (so that they survive restarts of the Pushgateway).

You can also build from scratch, and just start it as a docker container.

    docker build -t xyz/prompush:0.2.0 ./ 
    docker run docker run -p 9091:9091 xyz/prompush:0.2.0 

## Use it

### Libraries

Prometheus client libraries should have a feature to push the
registered metrics to a Pushgateway. Usually, a Prometheus client
passively presents metric for scraping by a Prometheus server. A
client library that supports pushing has a push function, which needs
to be called by the client code. It will then actively push the
metrics to a Pushgateway, using the API described below.

### Command line

Using the Prometheus text protocol, pushing metrics is so easy that no
separate CLI is provided. Simply use a command-line HTTP tool like
`curl`. Your favorite scripting language has most likely some built-in
HTTP capabilities you can leverage here as well.

*Caveat: Note that in the text protocol, each line has to end with a
line-feed character (aka 'LF' or '\n'). Ending a line in other ways,
e.g. with 'CR' aka '\r', 'CRLF' aka '\r\n', or just the end of the
packet, will result in a protocol error.*

Examples:

* Push a single sample into the group identified by `{job="some_job"}`:

        echo "some_metric 3.14" | curl --data-binary @- http://pushgateway.example.org:8080/metrics/job/some_job

  Since no type information has been provided, `some_metric` will be of type `untyped`.

* Push something more complex into the group identified by `{job="some_job",instance="some_instance"}`:

        cat <<EOF | curl --data-binary @- http://pushgateway.example.org:8080/metrics/job/some_job/instance/some_instance
        # TYPE some_metric counter
        some_metric{label="val1"} 42
        # This one even has a timestamp (but beware, see below).
        some_metric{label="val2"} 34 1398355504000
        # TYPE another_metric gauge
        # HELP another_metric Just an example.
        another_metric 2398.283
        EOF

  Note how type information and help strings are provided. Those lines
  are optional, but strongly encouraged for anything more complex.

* Delete all metrics grouped by job and instance:

        curl -X DELETE http://pushgateway.example.org:8080/metrics/job/some_job/instance/some_instance

* Delete all metrics grouped by job only:

        curl -X DELETE http://pushgateway.example.org:8080/metrics/job/some_job

### About the instance label

The Prometheus server will attach an `instance` label to each scraped
metric that does not already have one. The automatically attached
instance label contains the host and port of the target scraped. If a
metric already has an instance label, an `exporter_instance` label is
attached instead. (This behavior will be configurable once
[server issue #490](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/490) is
fixed.)

However, metrics pushed to the Pushgateway are often on a service
level and therefore not related to a particular instance. Not
attaching an instance label in that case is not an option because the
server will then attach the host and port of the Pushgateway as an
instance label (which is actually desired for metrics about the state
of the Pushgateway itself).

Therefore, if a metric is pushed to the Pushgateway without an
instance label (and without instance label in the grouping key, see
below), the Pushgateway will export it with an emtpy instance label
(`{instance=""}`).

### About timestamps

If you push metrics at time *t<sub>1</sub>*, you might be tempted to
believe that Prometheus will scrape them with that same timestamp
*t<sub>1</sub>*. Instead, what Prometheus attaches as a timestamp is
the time when it scrapes the push gateway. Why so?

In the world view of Prometheus, a metric can be scraped at any
time. A metric that cannot be scraped has basically ceased to
exist. Prometheus is somewhat tolerant, but if it cannot get any
samples for a metric in 5min, it will behave as if that metric does
not exist anymore. Preventing that is actually one of the reasons to
use a push gateway. The push gateway will make the metrics of your
ephemeral job scrapable at any time. Attaching the time of pushing as
a timestamp would defeat that purpose because 5min after the last
push, your metric will look as stale to Prometheus as if it could not
be scraped at all anymore. (Prometheus knows only one timestamp per
sample, there is no way to distinguish a 'time of pushing' and a 'time
of scraping'.)

You can still force Prometheus to attach a different timestamp by
using the optional timestamp field in the exchange format. However,
there are very few use cases where that would make
sense. (Essentially, if you push more often than every 5min, you
could attach the time of pushing as a timestamp.) 

## API

All pushes are done via HTTP. The interface is vaguely REST-like.

### URL

The default port the push gateway is listening to is 8080. The path looks like

    /metrics/job/<JOBNAME>{/<LABEL_NAME>/<LABEL_VALUE>}

`<JOBNAME>` is used as the value of the `job` label, followed by any
number of other label pairs (which might or might not include an
`instance` label). The label set defined by the URL path is used as a
grouping key. Any of those labels already set in the body of the
request (as regular labels, e.g. `name{job="foo"} 42`)
_will be overwritten to match the labels defined by the URL path!_

Note that `/` cannot be used as part of a label value or the job name,
even if escaped as `%2F`. (The decoding happens before the path
routing kicks in, cf. the Go documentation of
[`URL.Path`](http://golang.org/pkg/net/url/#URL).)

### Deprecated URL

There is a _deprecated_ version of the URL path, using `jobs` instead
of `job`:

    /metrics/jobs/<JOBNAME>[/instances/<INSTANCENAME>]

If this version of the URL path is used _with_ the `instances` part,
it is equivalent to the URL path above with an `instance` label, i.e.

    /metrics/jobs/foo/instances/bar

is equivalent to

    /metrics/job/foo/instance/bar

(Note the missing pluralizations.)

However, if the `instances` part is missing, the Pushgateway will
automatically use the IP number of the pushing host as the 'instance'
label, and grouping happens by 'job' and 'instance' labels.

Example: Pushing metrics from host 1.2.3.4 using the deprecated URL path

    /metrics/jobs/foo

is equivalent to pushing using the URL path

    /metrics/job/foo/instance/1.2.3.4

### `PUT` method

`PUT` is used to push a group of metrics. All metrics with the
grouping key specified in the URL are replaced by the metrics pushed
with `PUT`.

The body of the request contains the metrics to push either as
delimited binary protocol buffers or in the simple flat text format
(both in version 0.0.4, see the
[data exposition format specification](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZjyKiKxZV83VI9ZKAXRGKaUKK2BIWCT7oiGBKDBpjEY/edit?usp=sharing)).
Discrimination between the two variants is done via the `Content-Type`
header. (In case of an unknown value for `Content-Type`, the text
format is tried as a fall-back.)

The response code upon success is always 202 (even if the same
grouping key has never been used before, i.e. there is no feedback to
the client if the push has replaced an existing group of metrics or
created a new one).

_If using the protobuf format, do not send duplicate MetricFamily
proto messages (i.e. more than one with the same name) in one push, as
they will overwrite each other._

A successfully finished request means that the pushed metrics are
queued for an update of the storage. Scraping the push gateway may
still yield the old results until the queued update is
processed. Neither is there a guarantee that the pushed metrics are
persisted to disk. (A server crash may cause data loss. Or the push
gateway is configured to not persist to disk at all.)

### `POST` method

`POST` works exactly like the `PUT` method but only metrics with the
same name as the newly pushed metrics are replaced (among those with
the same grouping key).

### `DELETE` method

`DELETE` is used to delete metrics from the push gateway. The request
must not contain any content. All metrics with the grouping key
specified in the URL are deleted.

The response code upon success is always 202. The delete
request is merely queued at that moment. There is no guarantee that the
request will actually be executed or that the result will make it to
the persistence layer (e.g. in case of a server crash). However, the
order of `PUT`/`POST` and `DELETE` request is guaranteed, i.e. if you
have successfully sent a `DELETE` request and then send a `PUT`, it is
guaranteed that the `DELETE` will be processed first (and vice versa).

Deleting a grouping key without metrics is a no-op and will not result
in an error.

**Caution:** Up to version 0.1.1 of the Pushgateway, a `DELETE` request
using the following path in the URL would delete _all_ metrics with
the job label 'foo':

    /metrics/jobs/foo

Newer versions will interpret the above URL path as deprecated (see
above). Consequently, they will add the IP number of the client as an
instance label and then delete all metrics with the corresponding job
and instance label as their grouping key.

## Development

The normal binary embeds the files in `resources`. For development
purposes, it is handy to have a running binary use those files
directly (so that you can see the effect of changes immediately). To
switch to direct usage, type `make bindata-debug` just before
compiling the binary. Switch back to "normal" mode by typing `make
bindata-embed`. (Just `make` after a resource has changed will result
in the same.)

##  Contributing

Relevant style guidelines are the [Go Code Review
Comments](https://code.google.com/p/go-wiki/wiki/CodeReviewComments)
and the _Formatting and style_ section of Peter Bourgon's [Go:
Best Practices for Production
Environments](http://peter.bourgon.org/go-in-production/#formatting-and-style).
